Welcome to the Real Python Podcast. This is Episode 214. Do you need help making data tables
in Python look interesting and attractive? How can you create beautiful, display-ready tables
as easy as charts and graphs in Python? This week on the show, we speak with Rich Ione and
Michael Chow from Posit about the Great Tables Python Library. Michael and Rich discuss the
design philosophy and history behind creating display tables. We dig into the grammar of tables,
the background of the project, and an ingenious way to build a collection of examples for a
library. We briefly cover how Rich and Michael started contributing to open source. And we also
discuss practicing data skills with challenges and resources like Tidy Tuesday. This episode
is sponsored by MailTrap, an email delivery platform that developers love.
Try for free at mailtrap.io. All right, let's get started.
The Real Python Podcast is a weekly conversation about using Python in the real world. My name is
Christopher Bailey, your host. Each week, we feature interviews with experts in the community
and discussions about the topics, articles, and courses found at realpython.com. After the podcast,
join us and learn real-world Python skills with a community of experts at realpython.com.
I'm excited today to have a couple people from Posit come and visit me. We've been doing a few
additional data science-focused things lately, and I'm excited to have Michael and Rich from Posit
on the show today to talk about Great Tables. So, welcome to the show.
Thank you. Yo, thanks for having us.
Yeah, awesome. So, one of the things I've been trying to do lately is talk a little bit about
how people got not necessarily involved in programming, but maybe how they got involved
in open source, creating projects like this. Maybe we can start with you, Michael. Do you
have a background in open source before working on Great Tables?
Yeah, that's a great question. So, I guess it all started in grad school. So, I did a degree
in cognitive psychology. So, I was using R a lot for research and Python a lot to do some
neuroscience stuff. And I think that it sort of started me, like a lot of people, with interacting
with a lot of open source. And then sort of as I went, I would say I built a lot of really bad
open source tools that never really went somewhere. And then from there, I joined a company called
Datacamp, where I was able to actually like kind of put the tools out that we were using. And then
I think from there, working on some other tools for open source. So, I worked on a tool for data
wrangling called Suba. And I think that's where it kind of like, I went from like fledgling
open source stuff to more kind of serious. So, I think it sort of started at grad school,
and then like crappy open source to more kind of reasonable-ish tools.
What were things that defined the change for you? Like, you felt like you graduated when you
started doing Suba. What was different about it? I think open source really helped in the
beginning. It was more like learning that I was like building open source stuff. And that let me
kind of like show my friends and try out like putting things into the world.
Yeah, yeah. Showing your work.
Yeah. But I think I needed more like professional experience with software engineering. And so it's
kind of like over time, it just got a little bit better until I felt a little more kind of ready
to put stuff out. But I think it started with like research and then interacting a lot with open
source. And then just doing a bad job a lot until it kind of started to feel okay to share with
people. Yeah, yeah. Get comfortable.
Yeah.
That sounds good. Yeah. Awesome. Rich, what is your background in open source?
For me, it happened a bit after grad school. And it's wild. Like I started with R just because
I heard R a lot. It was mentioned by people around me. He did this in R. She did it in R.
Like, you should learn R. Okay, fine. I'll get to learning R. Okay. And then like it was great.
I started using it for work just after grad school. I got a real job. It made things
automatable. Things I had to do on the daily were just a bit easier. Now I developed some
personal tooling. I was like, wow, I'm going to just release this stuff on GitHub and see where
it goes. Nobody's going to care. But eventually, maybe some people cared. But I got into more
general stuff after that instead of domain specific things. And then I started interacting
with people. Then I super caught the open source bug. Yeah. After all that stuff was conspiring
around me.
There were projects that were involved in that last section there where you felt like,
I got the bug and I really want to be in there.
Yeah. Yeah. When I sort of made more broad, useful things, then people started to interact
and made PRs and a lot of communication going. It just felt good. And I just wanted to keep
going with that. And so I did more of that. So it kind of snowballed from basic, timid,
you know, personal projects to more generalized, accessible projects for everybody.
Yeah. Do you feel like, and this is maybe for both of you, do you feel like that's an optimal
way to get into open source to do the thing of dabbling and trying to send out requests to
different projects or building your own? Do you have suggestions for people as far as the kind
of path that might be easier to, I don't necessarily easier, but a path in to open source?
Well, for me, it was pretty low pressure. It wasn't my actual job, so no one was telling me
what to do. So it was like a personal thing. And so it felt leisurely in a weird way. And I thought
that was great. Like there's no pressure, there's no work pressure to do this stuff. It's totally
optional. So that did the trick for me. How about you, Michael?
Yeah. I mean, I think for getting started, it's just so valuable contributing through like issues
or PRs, but I actually think just choosing an open source place and kind of trying to be useful
in whatever way you feel most comfortable is really, it's good for everyone. Like the,
I feel like when you stick around, open source people notice and are really happy.
Yeah.
And you get kind of like some practice and often guidance. Like we, we have a really
great contributor right now and great tables, Jerry, who just like, he answers GitHub discussions
and he responds to issues. And I feel like we're so team Jerry, like when Jerry opens PRs,
like I want Jerry to be really successful because he's been so helpful. And I think that's
a really nice way to get involved is even if you're just responding to issues or discussions,
I think it really builds relationships with the maintainers so that when you want to do other
things, like I would take time out of my day to do anything that would be useful to Jerry.
Yeah.
And I think that that's, that's the kind of exciting opportunity that open sources,
you can kind of start with issues and through relationships move to even like mentorship and
guidance and new stuff.
That's cool. Do you feel like it's helped your career also, like kind of,
you know, finding positions and things like that? Like if there was an open spot, you, you,
you say, Oh, maybe Jerry or, you know, something like that. Is that a common occurrence that you've
seen?
I've certainly seen it. Yeah.
Yeah.
And even my own sort of story is, is like that, like contributing open source leads to like,
you know, eventually getting a position cause you get good enough and you get known enough to,
to be in the running for, for a job.
Yeah.
But for others, yeah, I totally seen it where people just contribute and like they're in there,
they're talking on social media as well. Well, that really helps a lot because you know, they're
known.
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Kind of build your profile.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. I do think it helps too, that if you're working on open source,
yeah, you do kind of have to explain like, what did I do and why is it useful for people?
Yeah.
And I think that if you're a software engineer and what you're building is more proprietary,
you do almost have the same challenge for your career. Like you do need to explain to people,
like what did I do and why was it useful, but it can be a lot harder to kind of talk about it.
You kind of have to find creative ways to talk about it sometimes. So I think it helps having
open source where it's just kind of laid out and you can point to it and kind of talk about it.
Yeah, that's cool. Awesome. Well, I brought you here to talk about great tables.
I had seen the project and I was like, this is super interesting. Like this idea that so many
people focus on data visualizations as the primary way to communicate what's being created. But to me
very often, the amount of information that you could present in a table is just like dramatic.
And I think your examples just really show it off. And so maybe we can start with this.
What do you mean by the term display table? Should I have a go at this? What do you think?
Oh yeah. Yeah, it's tough. It's tough. It's tough to choose a word, like a word before table,
because tables can be a lot of things. But I think we stuck on display table because it's
the sort of table you see published like in a journal or see sports analytics, like a standings
table, for instance. Yeah. It's hard to get that across just from data table, something you
manipulate. This is like a kind of thing for presentation. Yeah. And it's different than
other types of tables you might see on my pages in that it doesn't have like hundreds or thousands
of rows you just page through. And it's also not like a raw data frame, like as in a console.
Yeah. So yeah, it's tough. There's not really great names for this sort of thing,
but we went display table. It sort of fits and gets a point across. It's basically something
you want to gussy up and show people, present. It's for presentation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
So like if you were thinking about like a common thing in a presentation. Yeah. This idea that
everybody's been in the presentation where there's a 5,000 bullets on a slide. It's like,
no, this is the opposite of that. This is the detailed information in a tabular format. Yeah.
And it's trying to get the point across as quickly as possible. Exactly. It might be like
like a summary table, not raw data. So it's like really distilled. You're trying to get something
across pretty quickly, but you're doing it in table form and you can still do that. You don't
have to have a giant wall of numbers. You could, you know, you could make it parsable more easily.
You can give it, you can narrow down the scope. You can give it like annotations and things like
that. Yeah. Yeah. So that's really what it is. It's more like a, like a taking the best parts
of plots and putting them into tables. Yeah. Okay. You mentioned briefly there,
like the idea that this might be something you'd see, you know, in a print form or web form,
potentially since print, there's not as many magazines and newspapers as there used to be,
but you know, definitely those kinds of things that you would see this in. Yeah. There's so
many features I definitely want to dig into there, but you mentioned some of them. Yeah.
You're trying to go beyond this just data frame, right? This idea of this. Exactly.
Just columns and rows and maybe headers. What were some of the things that you felt were like,
okay, these are, these are missing as far as like doing this job of being a display
table or the components and things that you felt like, oh, this definitely needs to be there.
I definitely think it's interesting because yeah, like plot the word display table support. Cause
the word plot is almost like cheating. Like, you know, with a plot, you know, with a plot
that you're communicating. Yeah. And to your question of like, what, what's missing. I think
it's tricky because table, we think of like a big rectangle, like you mentioned,
right. But it's almost like the question, potentially a spreadsheet kind of thing.
Yeah. But it's almost like the question, like when we're displaying it,
when we're using a table as a visualization, what does it need? And I think a lot of the
really beautiful parts are sort of like information hierarchy, being able to drive
attention to the right pieces at the right time. And so like a plot, oftentimes plots have titles
and that's, that's probably the biggest, one of the biggest pieces of the information hierarchy
is that you're drawn right away to the title. It's really big. And it says, if you have two seconds,
this is what you're seeing. So I think it's funny, like that might not technically seem
like part of a table to people, but for display tabling, like plotting, it's like really critical.
And then having all those other trappings, like subtitles, footers, ways to kind of break up,
like what's a row of the table and groupings. Okay. I think those really big structural elements
are important because they really break things up and make it easy to kind of like group and
move your attention right from kind of big things to like details. So I think structure is one
really huge piece of tables that's often missing. Yeah. That kind of guides attention.
Yeah. I feel like these are skills, maybe a higher order Excel person who is involved in
making presentations would learn through creating sub-level headers and sections and things like
that. And in our space of data science, we typically aren't moving to a tool that does both
of those jobs that is communicating the information. It's just the tools have been data frames,
you know? And so the idea of like, okay, well, I want to like have this subheader,
like I'm looking at this one about the New York air quality measurements, and it's got
the subheading of like time and measurements. And then this nice, nice underlining indicating
these are the columns that are indicated below it and kind of creating a, like you said,
drawing your eye to it. So, yeah. And yeah, I just, I enjoy that. And also like the ability to
have different fonts and sizes of things to make things fit. Is that stuff that I think about
implementing those things? Is that hard for people to implement? It's not that hard because
we have methods for all these little things. If you use enough of them, you should get a really
nice looking table in the end. So we try to accommodate a lot of stuff, but the weird thing
is we have to show that in examples. Like we need examples to show. It's always hard on a podcast.
It's not that, it's like in general, when you're teaching people this stuff, you really have to
show examples where all this stuff is like sort of like consistently there. But it's nice when
you see it like, and all these little things add up to a great presentation, right? You change the
font, you have like the column widths, just the way, so it's nicely proportioned. You have the
sizing nice. You have maybe some borders put in, some theming. I mean, if we show that enough,
we sort of like build people, like you can make really nice tables. If you just go the extra mile
with these methods, then I think the point gets across that like, yeah, these tables are really
nice and I can do them. Here's an example. It's close to what I want. Yeah. Some of the things
that you've added that I think are really impressive are like the coloring inside of
cells, if you will, of the table, like that solar zenith angles is just like a piece of art.
I love that example. And then a lot of the sports ones definitely have the same kind of vibe where
you're having icons inside the columns there. And then also having small like bar graphs and
things in there to again, sort of blend tables and plots and graphs to kind of together. I feel
like a lot of this stuff has been built for plotting for a long time and graphing libraries.
Why do you feel like there was the absence of that in tables? Like were there other
attempts at this before your guys' exploration in here with great tables?
Yeah, that's a great question. There's almost like two phases I feel like this went through.
One is what you mentioned Rich worked on in our library to do a lot of this. And so he'd had like
a few years running up to working on Python of just kind of exploring some of that space.
Okay. And then there is in the Python space, Python libraries that have tried this. Like
I think there's Plottable that works with Matplotlib. Itables that does some more simple
interactive tables. And then things like Tabulate that's like a dead simple,
like one function that puts out like a simple markdown table. But it's a good question.
Rich had worked on kind of the more complex, like how do you create labels on top of your columns
and things like that. Yeah. I don't know, Rich, if you have thoughts on like in the R space,
what was there when you kind of started to think about how do you handle like structuring,
formatting and styling? Yeah. R was a bit different in this space because it actually
has lots of table packages. Oh, it has? Okay. Yeah. At the time that we started building
like the R implementation in 2018, we kind of upwards of 10, maybe 12. They were different
stages of development. Some of them were a little bit abandoned. Some of them,
you know, were less cared for. Sure. But still like there was lots there. Right. And I don't
know what that speaks to maybe because R is a stats heavy language and it has a native data
frame. You just expect to take that and move it into a publishing workflow, which is kind of their
LaTeX. And with R Markdown, we had that with other things as well. Okay. But anyways, yeah,
at the time we wanted to make something, I don't know, not better, but like in the same spirit of
like something that's like a little bit academic where it's like, you know, you can replicate these
tables you find in journals, but we want to go beyond because, you know, we're not just dealing
with paginated, you know, plots on like tables on a page, you know, we have HTML and we have,
you know, like the web. So we want to go beyond that and like try to see where the best ideas
taken from like tables in pages and see what we can do with doing the exact same thing on in HTML,
for instance. Yeah. And a lot of it just came from like the different, different sort of like
buckets of features, which are formatting, structuring, and styling. So we want to go
all out on this, all three sort of categories. Structuring is a little bit tough because like
the way like the R implementation and great tables expects a table, it's got to be pretty
close to the final form of how you want to present the table. There's no sort of reshaping within
great tables, right? So we kind of expect you to have like a reshaped table close to like
presentation. So we didn't change that from going to the R implementation to going to great tables
in Python. We kept that same, but we wanted to, we wanted to go maximal on things like formatting
and like styling. We just want to give you as much creative freedom as possible. Yeah. It's
tough. Cause like you got to choose like, you know, like you have to balance simplicity and
also like power there, right? You want to have, make it simple for the user, of course, but if
there's something you can't do, we want to make that possible as well. So that's kind of like a,
the balancing act. Yeah. I, I see that a lot in plotting libraries, you know, like it's almost
like a add on kind of things where you're like, okay, I want to, you know, add this functionality
to it. Yeah. Was that, does that feel that way as you were building this library? It does. Yeah.
Cause it takes a progressive approach, right? Each other statement adds a little bit more, right?
Adds like one small feature and it's, it's such that you can omit any of the statements and you
don't have a great effect on anything, right? They're mostly independent statements for the
most part. Okay. Yeah. It, it, there's lots of similarities to this and like lots of
client libraries, I would say. Yeah. I think, I think it's worth noting too, that the R library
is called GT, which is short for grammar of tables. So I feel like the grammar part's important.
Does that come from the grammar of graphics kind of in the same, you know, rhyming with that?
Yeah, a little bit. It's a bit of a riff on that. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But I, I don't know that,
that's one thing that struck me with great tables and these tools is that it felt like that idea
that there's a grammar, like for all the tables out there in the world, trying to figure out the
right kind of way to express them. Yeah. That's, that's like simple, but also flexible and able
to kind of hit the different examples. But it's also worth noting GT, GT was not available on PyPI
when we began building great tables. Yeah. So we had to have a discussion about like,
what should this thing be named? And so it's worth noting great tables is actually kind of a,
a little rewriting of history from, we just renamed the acronym from grammar of tables
to great tables. Yeah. As a kind of. It's good marketing too. Yeah. That's positive.
You know, it's optimistic. You can make great tables with this. Not adequate tables.
This episode is sponsored by MailTrap, an email delivery platform that developers love. An email
sending solution with industry best analytics, SMTP, and email API, along with SDKs for major
programming languages and 24 seven human support. Try it out for free at mailtrap.io. That's m-a-i-n-t-r-a-p-
dot IO. Kind of going into that a little bit, you talk about this idea of the grammar of it.
Was that a process then to like, you have this article, which I think is really interesting. The,
this is the design philosophy of great tables. And you have like this historic research into like,
you know, how to design great tables. How do you design great tables? How do you design
great tables? And you have like this historic research into like, literally like tablets that
have, you know, tablature layouts of, of stuff or, you know, table forms and so forth. Yeah.
Is that something that you did at the time or kind of came up a little later to say,
or was it kind of a mix of things? Like, you know, as I'm doing my research,
I kind of discovered some of this stuff. It's a mix. I mean, we went back, right, Michael? Like,
I mean, maybe you weren't there at the time. With GT.
I have no idea how it, so I'm curious to hear from you.
How did we get there?
I mean, with GT, we looked at some old, we wanted to get a lay of the land, not even just like our
packages, but stuff done before. It's remarkably hard to find any information, any books on tables.
I think just take it for granted. There's like plots. Yeah, sure. There's lots of stuff on
plots and graphics, but not so much on tables. It's hard to find any, any writings on it.
So we really had to research. And I mean, the hardest part is finding any, any writing on
tables at all. I mean, there's like things like, like style guides you find in journals and they
have recommendations, but nothing. We were lucky. We found something. I'm not even sure how I found
this. I think someone mentioned a long time ago. It's like this large work on tables from the
Census Bureau. Oh, okay. And it's called the Manual of Tabular Presentation. You might've
seen that maybe in the post. Yeah, it's in the post. Yeah, it's really cool. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that's like 1949. Yeah, 49, 49. Good year. But it's a great book and it's available,
it survives as a scanned PDF that if you just search it up, you can find it. And what a book,
like, I mean, like it goes through like nearly almost, I don't know, well over 250 pages of just
like table recommendations, what to do, what not to do. And like, I mean, it's, it's focused on
census. It's basically a census table style guide, but it can be, it's useful everywhere,
I think. I mean, some of the stuff in there is, I mine ideas from that all the time and like,
there's so much good stuff in there. And there's nothing else like it. There's no other like book
on just like tables. Like this is, these are the best ideas we have. So. I think about the,
the, the history of that because like, you know, that's the dawn of civilization of like, you know,
we're going to count the people, partly so we can tax them.
Dang. Of course. Yeah.
You know, and then like early forms of accounting, I'm guessing too, right? So,
but, but yeah, it would make sense that when suddenly there's a organization of government
that's going to count people that they would want to, you know, codify it or whatever.
Oh yeah. Basically way back then, Mesopotamia, they had big city problems and like, you know,
like trading issues. It's amazing when you look at those tablets, those like scans and drawings,
like recreations, they have all the, all the features that we have now, like,
okay. Like sub rows and like headers and footnotes, like notes. It's like, you know,
missing, missing cells. It's like pretty wild, actually. Yeah. Yeah. How much they got right.
Yeah. Yeah. Totally. You're not seeing the things that were removed. You know,
there's so many things that they got right at the beginning. So that's good.
What are some of the favorite features you have you want to call out that are parts of
great tables? Hmm. What do you think, Michael? What are your favorite features?
Good question. I honestly, I, I think some of my favorites. So there are some big,
they're like some heavy hitters, I think worth mentioning, like nano plots, where you can make
like a small bar plot or a line called a sparkline in your table. Yeah. And I think
these are really great because they kind of balance the value of a plot, like quick patterns
with some of the compactness of tables. So you can have a bunch of lines just indicating like
how something doing over time. But I don't, some of my favorite parts have been even the
silly parts, like the column spanners. So this is like putting labels over your columns.
Yeah. Like when I started looking at working with Rich, I, I realized I hadn't really done
a lot of styling. Like, like in grad school, I was like copying data out and using like Excel
or Microsoft word to format. Right. But it's even the concept of like putting a label over your
columns felt a little bit surprising and foreign to me. And that that's one thing I've really loved
is this idea that these are like really small, basic things you might do to make it better.
Yeah. And now they're kind of like quick and easy to do. And, and people love it.
Like when we had, you know, like a constrained feature, only one level of spanners, people like,
we want more. Come on, come on higher. Yeah. That's not enough to this guy. So like, yeah.
Yeah. I think the aesthetic stuff really jumps out to people too. You know, like if you see a
research paper and it's just like raw table after table or page after page and they aren't doing the
summarizations or not like leading your eye in the sense in this, but it's hard, right. As a,
as a programmer or even a data scientist, you maybe understand what you want to draw attention to,
but you don't have the design skill. Yeah. And so do you feel like this is something that would help
them quickly get good results? Yeah. One of the first things Michael did is make a gallery for
like great tables. And like, that's so important to have like good examples upfront. It gets your
imagination going and what's possible. Right. And then the codes right there, if you want to see it.
Yeah. I think that's super important. And, and the examples we have, we try to
make them nice, you know, so we try to like impress people a little bit, but also just
let them know what's, what's possible, what you can do. Yeah. Yeah. I think, I think one thing
that helped with the examples too, is because I am a table barbarian. Like I hadn't, I didn't have
four years leading up to it and the US census manual of tables at my disposal. So I think it
helped. I was just like pulling out of Rich's brain. The, it's almost like the examples gallery
is like me taking notes on neat tables that as Rich is just like flinging tables left and right.
So hopefully one thing that makes it nice is it's like, it was like an explainer to me as a total
novice to tables. Like what, what's the deal and how deep does the rabbit hole go? Yeah. Like you
mentioned the Zenith angles. Yeah. That styling can really like kind of go all out and do a full
color map. Yeah. And all that stuff. Yeah. It's a neat way, like heat maps in a different way,
you know, like that include the, you know, the numbers and all that sort of stuff. Yeah. Yeah.
It's kind of wild when you have a heat map, it's almost like the colors come first and then the
numbers become the annotations, right? You can just pretty much read it like just based on like
where it is on the grid. Yeah. Comes like a graphic. And then if you want to know the number,
just look at that secondarily, right? It's sort of turns the problem on its head, which is great.
One of the things that is a feature in that is with the, let's say lighter shades of the color
that are not maybe as deep, you are using, you know, black for the text that's in the, in the
cells. And then for the deeper, darker shades that are more opaque, you're switching to white
to kind of highlight that there. So it also makes it stand out. Is that something that
someone has to implement themselves or is it something that it does automatically?
Totally grid tables. That'd be so annoying to implement, right? You'd have to know like
color levels, the optimal sort of contrast. It's like, thank goodness, like that's handled.
It's what notes would say to grid tables. Yeah. Cool. I think. Yeah. And like,
what'd you think of that, Michael, when I showed that to you?
I think it's a really good example of our dynamic, like how we work together is that
like on this library, I approach it a lot like a software engineer. Like I'm kind of here to
help batten down the hatches and, and like build out the like guts, but that, that type of thing,
like, yeah. Bending over backwards to help a user get the right contrast, like switch the text from
dark to light. I don't, in my engineering brain, there's a temptation to be like, oh, that's your
problem. Like, like use a, use a function and hand it over to them or like give them the tools and be
like the powers in your hands. But, but I don't, I really appreciate that Rich, I think hit the
reality of like, there's maybe too much flexibility we might give people if we like task them with
that contrast, it might not hit as nice. And so I really appreciate the division of labor where I,
I could put kind of an engineering hat on and think about battening down the hatches. And he's
kind of, I don't know, in my mind, like really bent over backwards to do the right thing out of
the gate. Yeah, no, it's, it's been incredible. I think engineering brain, I might do the wrong
thing and just say, it's your job. So yeah, I really appreciate that dynamic. Yeah.
Was there a lot of thought that went into that then, Rich? Like the idea is that, that
I don't want to control what you can do, but I want you to have a nice result.
Yeah.
By default.
Yeah. The defaults. Yeah. Certainly you can escape out of that. You can, there's an option just to
turn that off and you handle, you know, like the text, we only touch it. We'll just, yeah. But yeah,
certainly. And like, there's even been revisions along the way in your implementation to make the
contrast better. Right. We started with something that was like, Oh, I forget the standard. It's
using the web, but I think there's an upcoming one that's starting to gain currency called APCA.
Okay.
Which offers even better contrast. There's certain color combinations where like, you just see it
and you're like, Oh, that's not the, that's not right. I mean, it's APCA, APCA really handles
it nicely. It's like, wow, this is just an improvement over, over that. So yeah,
it's definitely something I've cared about a lot and sort of kept up with because I think it's so
important, like, you know, to make tables readable no matter what you do.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. Like I, I think of having lived through the nineties
and desktop publishing revolution happening and everybody could make a zine and they put
every single font and it's possible. And you're like, wow, that's really fascinating, but pretty
ugly.
Oh yeah, early 2000s. Myspace continues.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Right. It's like, make it however you want. Yeah. So yeah, it's that
kind of idea of like having that balancing act of like, you know, how much control should they have
and, and then be able to turn them on and off. So that's cool.
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
I wonder about that on the output side. How are these output? Like, is it, is it output as
when you run that code, is it output as a graphic or as a text or like how, how is it output?
Yeah. Basically what we have right now is HTML as like the main output.
Okay.
And we also have like a way to capture tables as images, PNGs, PDFs, even in other image formats.
So we've got those two things down. The future, which hopefully is not too far in the future,
we're going to work on other open formats like LaTeX, maybe Typed, which is an upcoming one.
If that's a good challenger to LaTeX, maybe, maybe not. And also things like Word output tables,
like just basically having a table that is XML.
Yeah.
Friendly for that. Okay.
Exactly. That could just be put into a fresh Word document or
possible to embed it in an existing one.
Okay. So is that like something you put at the end of the code to say to this format,
you know, or whatever?
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
And we do have a hotly, like probably one of the hottest issues is people really want
interactive tables, like paginated. So I think in the name of display, we've went hard on
static, like really getting it right for publication and print. But people love...
Because it's totally missing.
Yeah. People really want interactive, like paginated or like easy other, like collapsible
things.
Yeah. That's what I was thinking. Yeah. Expanding and collapsing.
Yeah.
It's a totally different use case for exploring data more, right? I mean,
you can filter through, you can just find stuff, you know, a larger data set, maybe.
Yeah.
It's definitely a use case we don't want to ignore. So Michael's doing some serious work on it.
The one, the thing I thought you were going to hit at Rich was opening tables in the browser
that I was surprised to learn, great tables. There's a lot behind tables in accessibility.
So like screen readers and things like that.
Yeah.
Like GT, the R packages has done some serious work on that in the past. And I don't, Rich,
maybe you could say a little bit about those aspects of tables. I'm less familiar, but...
Yeah. Yeah.
Really interested in them.
We, yeah, we collaborate regularly with a blind professor, a computer science professor at
University of Illinois.
Okay.
I believe that's correct. I'm hoping that's right. Yeah. So we did a lot of work on making
tables accessible to screen readers. And, you know, when you get to like making tables as,
you know, a true table, like a table element, right. Instead of like interactive tables,
they typically go to divs, which are maybe less accessible in terms of screen readers.
Yeah.
But maybe not, maybe they solve that problem. But we got it so that in our collaboration,
we got so many of the recommendations for making tables screen reader friendly. Even,
so when you introduce complexity, like complex headers with spanners and even row groups,
you have to, you have to do a few things in the, you know, HTML code to make that not sound
terrible to a screen reader, right. To orient itself.
Right. Right. Yeah.
So we've all those recommendations. And like, so the feedback we got in the end was,
yeah, this is probably the most successful table package available in R.
Nice.
And so we took all that stuff and we, we wrapped that into like our outputs for great tables as
well. So that comes along for the ride. So it's a great example of like, you know, learning a lot
in a very long development cycle and taking that distilled bit of learning and like
hitting the ground running really hard in Python. Yeah.
Yeah. Cool. Like when you talk about output being HTML.
Yeah.
In that sense, then is it scalable? Like, oh, you could pull things horizontal,
pull things vertical. And it kind of keeps all that sort of stuff in line.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And like we have containers as well, so you can scroll
with tables and so you can be pretty flexible in how we sort of like, you can embed a table,
the HTML table from, from great tables really nicely in different contexts,
like in different blogs or whatever.
Nice. Yeah. Are there a lot of dependencies for the, for the package?
Not too many. We think pretty low.
I think super few. We
are, we're trying to, we're cognizant of keeping it low too, right? We're not.
Okay.
We have a few we had kind of early on that more for convenience that we've started to kind of
whittle away at, but I think, okay, I think right now there's really few dependencies.
Yeah. Almost done there. We have one lingering dependency on NumPy. It's kind of the last
data library we depend on, but even that we want to take out so that people can kind of bring
either like pandas or polars and so that a lot of these will be optional dependencies.
Okay.
But won't have to have kind of a big install.
What would the normal workflow be for a Python data scientist coming in to
add great tables to their project? You mentioned now three different sort of styles
data can kind of come in. You mentioned pandas and NumPy and you mentioned polars.
Does it matter the format and how does it look kind of starting and adding great tables to
a project like that?
It's really simple. One exciting thing is for polars v1, which is coming out soon.
The style property will return a great tables object. So you'll just be able to say like my
data frame dot style and get a great table out of it. For things like pandas, it's easy to,
you just call, we have a GT class that wraps the data frame and then you can call the great
tables methods to add things like headers and kind of organize or highlight information.
I do think the most, some of the most exciting things are polars related. And this is something
we learned sort of like early on, but after we'd started developing great tables is that
polars has a few really nice features that make it work really well with great tables.
And these are like, they have kind of like some special functions and interfaces to say,
select columns of a table. So if you wanted to like grab a group of columns to put a label over
them, it's really easy in polars to say like, give me every column starting with ABC.
Okay.
The other things for styling, polars, these same things, lazy expressions, make it really easy to
just tell great tables, like I want to make every cell yellow where this value is like equal to
something, or I want to make every NA value, I want to fill that cell to be yellow.
Okay.
And this is kind of just part of polars design is it has these lazy expressions,
but whether or not you use pandas or polars, all of this is possible.
Okay.
Yeah. I believe pandas gives lambdas, right?
Yeah. We tried to kind of fit to the style of the data frame we were using.
Yeah.
And that's been a bit of a transition, right? Like initially, you know, first versions of
great tables were more geared around pandas. Is that right?
Yeah, that's right. And we pretty seriously air gapped it early on. So we moved all of
our data frame specific stuff into its own module. So that really helped that
we didn't have it as spread throughout the code. So it was pretty quick as we rolled polar support,
we sort of had all our data frame stuff concentrated and could kind of slot it in.
And that's, I think that's something I've seen in a lot of libraries
more recently is I think a lot of libraries are doing more like pandas and polar support.
And so kind of keeping a lot of their data frame stuff in one place.
Yeah. I didn't research this, but what is it written in? I mean, I know you started in R,
but what is the core language that great tables is written in?
Oh, it's Python. It's pretty much all Python.
Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. I think it's a fair question though. Like in some world we would have said like,
oh, it's like a Rust library, you know, but yeah, it's coming so hot right now.
Yeah, it totally is.
Yeah, it definitely is. I've had a few different conversations about it and
been interesting talking about just the world of data lately and definitely talking about
what Wes is trying to do, this idea of decoupling things and not being so dependent on one or
another and which I think is great. I think that whole, the less sort of religious examples that
you have to buy into and be a member of is great because this is all just tools.
Yeah, absolutely.
When it comes down to it.
Yeah.
team member, Martin Bryce. He shows you how to install plot nine and set up Jupyter notebooks.
Use plot nine to create visualizations in an efficient and consistent way and combine the
different elements of the grammar of graphics, which involves several layers, including a data
layer and aesthetics layer and geometric objects layer, along with several additional techniques
within the grammar of graphics. You'll learn how to perform statistical transformations
and how to implement a visual style with themes. And you'll learn how to export your
data visualizations to files. Data visualization is a crucial step towards sharing your results
and findings. And I think this course will be a worthy investment of your time. Real Python video
courses are broken into easily consumable sections and where needed include code examples for the
technique shown. All lessons have a transcript, including closed captions. Check out the video
course, you can find a link in the show notes, or you can find it using the search tool on
realpython.com. One of the things I was wondering about with, again, some of these really cool
examples that you have shown are some of these ones that have to do like sports analytics, which
I guess people would have normally maybe seen online or again in a magazine or something like
that. This idea of like adding graphics, is that a difficult thing to do inside these tables?
I mean, it's not difficult for the user. I mean, it's a little difficult for us to
plan the API for that. I guess it relies on having the graphics on disk or accessible
through HTTPS and things like that. And then, you know, referencing what these graphics are in a
sort of nice way, right? Okay. So we did a few things to make it so you can sort of use patterns
and the like to construct like a path, like a template for a path, I suppose. Yeah. And then
we just made it work and we have, you know, sizing options as well. So graphics in a table is
always going to be a little bit difficult because cells are small. Yeah. Like are the graphics going
to be, you know, stretch out your cells too much? Like, of course you have that. But we at least
have at the, you know, at the method level, some ways to size things. So I think it turned out
great. I saw this example where it's sort of like overlapping, almost like taking the top of one and
overlapping it on the bottom of another. Is that a feature of it? Oh yeah. You can totally do that
with some sort of like HTML, sort of like, not trickery, but some, you know, if you're really
good at CSS and stuff, you can make that happen with overflow. Nice. Attributes and things like
that. Yeah. I love seeing that stuff. Whenever I see it, I'm like, wow, you really wanted something
and you just got it. You know, you made it happen. Yeah. I mean, by default, you know,
it's not really available, but you can make it happen and you get a density of information if
you overlap things. It's great to see. We touched on this a little bit. I don't know if I got
your favorite features, Rich. Oh yeah. I mean, okay. So Michael mentioned nanoplots. Love it
myself. I also just like, as a sort of like a bag of features, like one collection formatting
methods. I don't know why I love that so much. It's just like, it's such a simple thing,
but it goes so far. Yeah. I mean, just like, just a simple thing, like formatting something to a
static one or two decimal places, like numbers. Okay. I mean, that's wonderful. I mean, that's
so simple, but it can run deeply. You can, you can have things formatted to specific domains.
Yeah. Like financial stuff like that. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, exactly. So,
so it fits within expectations of that domain. I think it's great. And I think there's so much
you can do because it really just transforming data to another form, which is more palatable
for a table, you know, like reader, I guess you can say. And I think there's so much you can do.
I do think it's really fitting in a theme like Excel came up. I feel like
yeah, your love of formatters is your love of like, yeah, the ease of Excel.
Yeah. When creating a table, like millions of ways to format things fast to apply.
Yeah. And it's kind of nice that we sort of broke it up into different methods. Like each method is
sort of optimized as a specific interface just for the formatting task at hand.
Yeah. Instead of just having like
.format. It's like, okay, now you've come up with a specialized syntax to make that happen. But
I don't know, there's so much stuff around specific types of formatting,
like, you know, additional server arguments, which are just related to like one or two types.
I love the fact that it's sort of broken up and sure, it could be overwhelming, but we try to
sort of cure that overwhelming sort of like amount of like methods through better documentation.
Yeah. Cool. One of the things that you mentioned, Michael, of coming on board is, you know,
creating this really great like set of examples. Let's kind of get going. And are there ones that
you've wanted to add that you haven't gotten to yet? There's like additional things you're like,
oh, I want to show examples of this. Or is it something that's rolled out as features have
rolled out? Yeah, it's a good question. I feel like there's a ton that we want to add. We just
did a, well, what is this the third table contest, Rich? How many table contests have there been?
This might be the fourth. Okay. Wow. Okay. That sounds fun. It's hard to keep count.
So we, yeah, we have this table contest. It's great. Like Posit puts it on. It's a celebration
of tables, lots of prizes. You just submit tables and the code. And wow, like people are,
we posted on it and people are just, I hope people are agog with like all the tables.
Okay. I'm agog. I'll have to get a link from you to get the examples for that.
Yeah. Previous contests. Yeah. I think the winners are being announced like
within a couple of days too, for this contest. Okay. So we might have it. We should have it
then. We should have the link. Okay. But yeah, I mean, in terms of coming out at examples, like
even the existence of the table contest confused me. Like I was like, oh, of course you like,
you've been running contests where people submit tables for the past three years. Right. Like
just classic, classic open source software development. But I think, so with this latest
kind of like contest, I think there were, were there around 60 submissions? Yeah. About that.
Yeah. And they're so inspiring. Like these, every single time this, this thing rolls around,
I'm like, whoa, that's neat. I seen some crazy stuff. And it's, it's so, you know, like I've
heard this before, video game designers, like they make the games, but they're not so good at the
game sometimes. Like the players are way better. It's kind of like this, like we, we make our,
we make tables too, but they're not as good as people in the community. Like speed running and
things like that. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. It's exactly that same parallel. It's like, yeah.
Yeah. It's, it's funny. Yeah. You have no idea what, how people are going to use the thing
that you've created. And that's really inspiring. I'm sure. Yeah, definitely. It's when you said
overlapping images and tables, I was like, I have no idea what's happening, but I love that somebody
did like figure it out. You might get a player, player, like it was like a player thing. Yeah.
And their head wasn't covered over by the other person or wasn't chopped off. It was like they
were, they were sort of stabbed. It goes into like the neck of the person, like, like folder tabs
kind of thing. It was cool. I do think that is evidence that people better than me are making
tables for sure. Yeah. I definitely think audio files in there. Oh my gosh. It's like videos,
even. It's like probably a pretty common thing. Links and yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I suspect we'll,
yeah, we'll probably pull some of those into examples, but also we need some way to just
get out a lot of these freaky tables that people are submitting to these contests.
Cause I think they'll really kind of be a good next example set. I was going to say,
can we bring up a quarter doc because we wouldn't have such good examples or a great project website
probably without quarter doc. I mean, not as easily for sure. This is Michael's thing.
This is Michael's thing. Yeah. I, I was, I've wanted to get somebody on to talk about that.
Uh, generally, um, you're saying, um, Cordo or I'm not going to pronounce it. Yeah. Cordo doc.
It's kind of tricky. I think Rich is schmoozing me because I, I maintain a tool called Cordo doc,
which generates, um, API documentation for Python. So, so great tables, kind of like API reference.
It's powered by a tool called Cordo doc. Okay. This is, I get the confusion because there's a
tool Cordo doc with it works with a tool called Cordo. Yeah. Yeah. So Cordo is kind of the real
star. Um, and it's, it's a tool to make it easy to produce like reports. So if you're doing a data
analysis, you know, to generate like an HTML report, it's like maybe going beyond a standard
notebook to something a little more presentable, but still interactive. Yeah. And it uses a really
nice format that's called QMD. So it's all text-based. Okay. It's like a beefed up markdown
setup where you can put in code or markdown. So great tables documentation is built with Cordo.
Okay. So that's a neat thing. You could create like a single standalone report
or like a full fledged website or slides pretty easily. Okay. Yeah. And examples really benefit
from that because we just pop the examples in line, get the actual like table outputs and put
pros around them, you know, nicely formatted pros. It's really quite nice. If people want to
see examples of that, is that in your documentation itself then? Yeah. It's on the great tables
website. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. And then, yeah, if you go to Cordo.org, you can kind of see the range of
sites that get built with Cordo. Okay. So for example, I know, I think Philip Cloud from Ibis
came on a while ago. It looked like, so we worked together, um, and their website's built with Cordo
now. Okay. So Cordo doc is supporting like their API generation, but the really nice thing in open
sources, it's just a little bit easier to, I feel like add examples with Cordo because it's really
made to run code and generate websites. Okay. You'll notice like the great tables websites,
like filled with tons of code and our guide, like we've tried to really go all out in like examples
throughout. Yeah. And I think a lot of that is Cordo. It's just a little bit easier to write
and have it all get generated. So, so again, a tool that's assisting you in this whole process.
Yeah. And I do think it's, it is, it is funny in open source, like lowering the barrier for
executing code and having examples in your docs is I think surprisingly impactful. Like,
yeah, as it turns out, if you have a little bit of friction, you just don't like adding examples.
Right. One kind of nuts case is great tables doc strings. So if you look in the methods,
there are tons of like really long examples and the examples produce pretty rich outputs. It's
a little bit unusual. If you look at tools like pandas or polars or things that are using Sphinx
for documentation, or just the standard, what's it called? The built-in Python doc format where
you use kind of like three greater than signs. The dots. Oh yeah. The examples tend to be pretty
short because you hard code the outputs of your examples. Right. In your doc string. To be able
to do doc test on it. Right. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Doc test. But that, that creates a kind of funny
cycle where now as you're writing docs, you're like, oh, I have to create an example small enough
to hard code the output. Yeah. Okay. If you think of a table library, that's a bananas task force
because we have to output a table. And so it's nice with, with quarter we're just executing large
blocks of code. So we're able to give people pretty rich doc strings with nice long examples.
And that's been a really nice kind of cycle to get into, but it's a funny, it's like a small
dynamic, you know, like, do I have to hard code my outputs? And it happens a lot in open source,
but it's had a pretty big impact, I think, in how we approach docs and break it down.
Yeah. Go maximal with examples, which is, which is great. I think. Yeah.
Yeah. That's the, I mean, one of the things I do every other week is, you know, we talk about
articles and stuff in the, in the Python community, but we also look at projects and
I want to run their stuff. You know, I want to like.
Play natural. Yeah.
If I'm going to suggest this as a, you know, a thing of the week to check out,
if I can't get through the docs, I can't set up stuff. I can't run an example. Like,
it's like so crucial, you know, to like making it. And so like anything to make it easier,
especially if it's like a single person shop, that's a, that's a huge deal. So that's awesome.
All right. Well, definitely include the links for that.
Yeah.
I wanted to build on top of the, you know, kind of the contest thing.
I feel like this is semi-related and I haven't had anybody on to talk about it,
but I wanted to talk about Tidy Tuesday a little bit. I'm sorry. Is that right?
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. And we were talking right before we began and you said that you have some experience
and have been involved in it somewhat. And so maybe you can tell a little bit about what it is
and how you're involved with it.
I mean, I've heard about it a long time ago. I used to follow like,
used to be a thing, like it's not so much now, but in R we had a lot of like social
media activity on Twitter. Many through the R stats hashtag. And then also the, I think also
the Tidy Tuesday hashtag, I don't know, but it used to be like full of stuff. Like my feed would
just come, oh my God, filled with like examples of the Tidy Tuesday. I would know what the Tidy
Tuesday dataset was because I had to see tons of examples on the dataset of the week.
It was wild to see that. That was an example of overload, but it was always inspiring.
So I'm like, and I think I owe a lot of debt to like care, for examples from Tidy Tuesday,
like seeing all this stuff is really, like I said, inspiring. So I want to inspire people,
obviously in my own works. So like spirit of Tidy Tuesday is wrapped up in GT and great tables.
Like we have lots of datasets. I mean, just recently I had a PR. I sent to Michael,
let's add, I don't know, five, six new datasets. And he was like, sure,
let's go in that direction. We have, I mean, we're gonna make a lot of examples,
so we have to have a lot of datasets and like Tidy Tuesday is all about datasets and making
samples and being inspired and having fun in the process. Have you played with it much, Michael?
Yeah. I use it a lot for mentorship, which has been really nice because I think that
there's this funny thing where like, if you watch certain tutorials, sometimes things are like a
little bit too clean. And I think it's really good for mentorship. Yeah. You're like, wow,
this really worked out really sweet. Like this path was nice.
It's not very real world at all. It's the whole like 80, 20 thing. It's like 80% of your time is
just like getting this ready to be able to like start working with it.
Right. And I do think those are valuable in their own right to kind of get people started. But I
think Tidy Tuesday has been really nice to like, be like, let's see what will go wrong. And let's
see what happens when you hit an error and you have no idea what caused it or like your CSV won't read
for mysterious reasons. And I feel like it's been really good for data science mentorship
to not only show people that and have them try it, but to hit it myself and be like,
hmm, just going, I'm like, I don't know why this broke or like reshaping data,
just like working through it. And then like figuring out what did I do that kind of like,
how did I even approach this problem? Yeah. So there's, there's a really great data scientist,
Dave Robinson. He does this all in R, but he used to record himself once a week for an hour
analyzing Tidy Tuesday data. And I found it so inspirational. It was one of the big
inspirations for working on Suba and tools for data wrangling that I got to watch him live,
work through analyses and see how quickly he could do things. And also, I'll see how he edits
his code because when people work, they like, they go back, they adjust code, you know, they move
things. Right. Right. Yeah. And that's really hard to capture when you write something out.
And so just seeing like, what is this first five minutes look like? How does he get to a plot
quickly? And what would I have to do to kind of like keep pace with him? Okay. So I've really
enjoyed those aspects. The more like in the weeds, rough, unclean, kind of like realistic
analytic settings. Yeah. I think it feels like this is, you know, the data community's answer
to like code challenges and things like that. You know, here's something to puzzle through like
what the advent of code and things like that in that vein. I know there are some other examples,
but this is one that's at least been ongoing, just really kind of cool. So I'll definitely
include some links for people to check out and learn a little more about it.
Yeah. It has amazing steam power. And Dave has a lot of this stuff on YouTube, right? Pretty much
all of it, right? The complete archive. Yeah. Okay. I think it has one big,
like what it complements things like advent of code in one really big way, which is
it's a different type of exercise. Like advent of code says, how would you get this solution?
So it's like, here's your starting point. Here's the ending point. Get there. Teddy Tuesday says,
here's the starting point. Move, like move through the space.
Yeah. What do you want to draw out of this? Yeah.
Yeah. And that's basically what data analysis is. It's like, usually you don't have the end,
you just need to, you need to like dune buggy around.
You're almost developing the question sometimes as you're coming toward the answer.
Yeah. Yeah. And the great thing is like, we used to see tons of plots
from Teddy Tuesday's data sets. And then later on, we started to see tables and it's like,
tables. Yeah. So like, cause there's no constraints on what you can make. It's like,
nice to see. I love that. Can we all start with Rich?
What's something that you're excited about that's happening in the world of Python?
Oh, I think just Polars becoming a big force, like becoming integrated. A lot of libraries are
now considering and implementing multi, like pandas plus Polars. And also the other thing that
is, Markzware really has this package called Marwalls, which basically helps to make that
possible, creating the backend for you. So, and tons of methods. So you can incorporate both
data frames in your library. Okay. That to me is pretty exciting. It's like integration,
interoperability. That's just one part of it, but that's a pretty interesting part of it for me.
Yeah. Yeah. Michael?
Yeah. I think it's maybe two things. One is for sure Narwals, which is,
basically write Polars code and run it on a pandas data frame. I love that style of
interface where you can think in one thing and have it work on another.
Because I think that our thoughts are the most important thing, like the strategies
and the things we've learned are the most important thing. Like, I don't want to think
about whether a method's called like mean or average across six libraries. I want to choose
one library that I love and have an engineer work out the details because I think cognition's the
hard part. The other is I think plot nine, the plotting library is a hidden gem. It's one of
those libraries where I think for some reason, I think it gets overlooked often when looking at
plotting libraries, but then when you talk to people, there's like this really zealous group of
plot nine fanatics. And I've been working with plot nine's author, Hassan. He's been working on
this tool for probably nine years now. And he himself is a fanatic. He's just dedicated to
these very subtle plotting issues. I think of the same sense that we talked about color contrast,
how Rich for Great Tables made it easy to like, you should have white text on a dark background
and you should switch it to dark text when it's a light background. I feel like Hassan has done
a lot of the same things for plotting, like the ergonomic benefits. And so I'm working with him
on writing a guide for plot nine that we can put on the site to make it easier for people to get
started and to kind of learn the basics. So I'm really excited to work with him on that and to
use documentation to try to really bring out the story of plot nine because I think it's amazing
to see the amount of time he's put into it. And as I talk to him, just the types of problems that
he's saved me from, but that I wouldn't appreciate because he did so well, if that makes sense.
Like, yeah, yeah, set you up for success that you didn't even know about. Yeah, that's cool.
Yeah. So I think those two.
That was the library I was thinking of when I thought of the, in the Python world,
the grammar of graphics is definitely there. And the idea that it's related to the,
sort of the grammar of tables that you guys are developing here.
Right. Yeah.
Awesome. So Rich, what's something that you want to learn next? This doesn't have to be
a part about programming. It could be anything, but what do you want to learn?
So many things. It's like trying to enumerate all of them. I think I do want to learn programming.
I mean, not programming. I mean, to be a better Python developer. I mean, like I'm doing it right
now. Michael has been supremely patient as a mentor for me coming from R for so long and
switching to that. Sometimes I, I'm like, Oh my God, sorry, Michael. Like this is a,
this is really bad. Poor show, but he's very patient. I just want to keep learning more
Python. I mean, I want to learn other things too. I want to do other things, but you know,
like maybe play more bass and that's fun. So play bass as you learn Python.
Yeah, exactly. When I combine the two. But I think becoming a more proficient Python
person would be, would be great. And then I really want to go down that road.
Yeah, that's awesome. Are there any specific tools or things you're thinking of
using in that process? Well, I'm thinking of taking a course and as well, you know,
doing more open source projects, maybe like a personal project as well. So it's not like,
you know, all like production stuff. It's kind of like I can noodle a bit.
So I'm part of it's just looking around and finding some nice new books. It's changed a
lot, Python, like quickly. Yeah. Pretty dramatically. Yeah. I mean, I used it before
in a job, but that was like, like 2.7 type of days, you know, like that sort of thing.
2.9, I think it was. So I want to get more up to speed and maybe go a little bit deeper in.
Cool. Give my glow break.
You'll have to send him the right, like real Python tutorials. Send him down that rabbit hole.
Yeah. This, that just makes sense.
All right. So Michael, what's something that you want to learn next?
I, I've been going down this funny rabbit hole of documentation, like what makes documentation good.
And I think in two ways, like if you look around at open source tools,
what are all the different approaches people take and what seems to work well and what seems to
cause some challenges. I've noticed a little bit of like variation in people's approaches.
Like one of my favorite is that I think Pydantic and FastAPI, they chose not to document their API
first. And that's surprising to me because I find most engineers are like, I've got to document
my API. You know, I've got to like document each function and class.
They went the other way. They wrote user guides. And I find that a really inspiring move. So I've
been thinking a lot about what adds up to like really great documentation, the guides, the
examples and stuff.
Yeah. It sounds like the workflow also, like when in the process do I do this? Because
if it's a, if it's a stumbling block for a developer, like, oh, I have to do this now.
Whereas like, maybe they'll find it easier to do the user thing first.
Yeah. Right. Like it could actually shape the design of the tool even, because if it's hard
to explain in a guide, it could even be like the tool needs to be reworked a bit. So I could see
these things. I think on the side, maybe we had a friend recently invite us to harvest honey. So
he's a beekeeper and he was like, yo, do you want to harvest honey? Six hours later, we're like,
we've got like several five gallon buckets filled. We're like dripping in honeys everywhere.
We had to power wash it off. But he, he was like, you, you too could keep bees. And I think that
that maybe awakened something in us. So do you have a spot to do that?
We could, our, our backyard's long enough that we could have a little bee zone. So I feel like
something maybe was awakened in me. We'll see. That's cool. We'll see where that goes.
I think my wife would love, love that. I think she's,
I don't know, it's a double-edged sword. I think she thinks that they're, they're fascinating,
but she's also a little terrified of them. So. Yeah, that's tough. They do have like a
weapon on there, but so I don't know. Yeah, exactly. You got to be careful.
That's cool. So what, what I wanted to leave with is how could people follow the work that
you do online? We can maybe start with the project itself and then how people could follow
yourselves individually. Yeah. Well, I'm on LinkedIn. That's like, okay. People are going
there a lot. If people are still on Twitter or whatever it's called these days, we actually
have a great tables account. Okay. That would be the one to follow there. Yeah. It's actually
GT underscore package. Okay. I like it works in both cases though. Yeah. Yeah, it kind of does.
Yeah. I mean, it was chosen a long time ago, but it's pretty, I love our naming system. It totally
works. So that's the one way to do it. And of course, you know, great tables site, which I'm
hoping is searchable. Yeah. In which are a way you would search for that sort of thing. Okay.
Yeah. What do you think? I think, yeah, I'm really kind of like
huddled in on LinkedIn these days and where I guess great tables is also a PIP install away.
Yeah. PIP install great dash tables. Yeah. Oh, we got discord as well. Oh yeah. Okay.
Yeah. If you just look at readme great tables, we got, we got some ways to get in touch with us.
We really want to hear people. So people get in our discord, ask questions, introduce themselves,
ask other people questions. Great. It's a great sort of Q and a place if you want to go there.
Okay. Yeah. I think it's fun. I would say too, with the discord and things like
GitHub discussions, like I wouldn't hesitate to put anything there. We're like so curious about
the experience of using great tables. And I think even if you, you feel like you have a
silly question or issue, we learn a ton from like every problem people hit. Yeah. It's probably
something we overlooked realistically speaking. Like, sure. So it's, it's a big service. I think
whenever people even hit a problem or feel like something wasn't intuitive, we're super open to
that. I think, I think it's a big service that, that people provide. Great. Well, Michael, Rich,
it's been fantastic to talk to you. Thanks for coming on the show. Yeah. Thanks for having us.
Yo, thanks for having us.
And don't forget, this episode was brought to you by MailTrap, an email delivery platform
that developers love. Try it out for free at mailtrap.io. I want to thank Richard Ione and
Michael Chow for coming on the show this week. And I want to thank you for listening to the
Real Python Podcast. Make sure that you click that follow button in your podcast player.
And if you see a subscribe button somewhere, remember that the Real Python Podcast is free.
If you like the show, please leave us a review. You can find show notes with links to all the
topics we spoke about inside your podcast player or at realpython.com slash podcast. And while
you're there, you can leave us a question or a topic idea. I've been your host, Christopher Bailey,
and look forward to talking to you soon.